1. Insert mode (where you can type like normal text editor. Press i for insert mode)

2. Command mode (where you can give commands to the editor to get things done. Press ESC to enter into command mode)

Most of them below are in the command mode

x - to delete the unwanted character.
u - to undo the last command and U to undo the whole line
A - to append test at the end
:wq - to save the file and exit
:q! - to trash all changes
dw - move the cursor to the begining of the word to delete that word
2w - to move the cursor to the begining of the two words forward
3e - to mode the cursor to the end of the third word forward
22b - use b to move backward 2 words.
0 - to move the cursor to the starting of the line
dw - deletes a word
d2w - deletes 2 words
dd - to delete the line
2dd - to delete 2 lines
p - puts the previously deleted text after the cursor (Type dd to delete a line and store it in a vim register and p to put the line)
r - to replace the letter eg. press re to replace the letter with e
ce - to change until the end of a word (place the cursor on the u in lubw it will delete ubw)
G - to move you to the bottom of the file
gg - to move you to the begining of the file. Type the number of the line you want to be on and type gg or G to goto that line
% - to find a matching 0,],or}
:s/old/new/g - to subsitute 'new' for 'old' where g is globally
/ - forward search: n to find the next occurrence and N to search in opposite direction
? - backward search: n to find the previous occurrence and N to search in the opposite direction
:! to the shell commands like :!dir, :!ls
:w - TEST (where TEST is the filename you choose). save the file
v - starts visual mode for selecting the lines and you can perfrom operation on that like d delete.
:r - Filename will insert the content into the current file.
R - to replace more than one character
y - operator to copy text using v visual mode and p to paste it.
yw - (copy) yanks is one word.
o - opens a line below the cursor and starts insert mode
O - opens a line above the cursor and starts insert mode
a - insert text after the cursor
e - command moves to the end of a word
y - operator yanks (copies) text, p puts (pastes) it.
R - enters Repalce mode until <ESC> is pressed.
ctr-w - to jump from window to another.

Type a command :e and press ctrl+D to list all the commands that start with e and press tab to complete the command.
